Let's finish the last step and include
the portfolio weights to get the portfolio variance.
The formula for the variance of
this two stock portfolio uses the weights for each stock to
calculate the portfolio's variance in terms of
the variances and covariances of the stocks.
Recall that we have formulas that express each of
these asset variances and covariances in terms of the risk factors.
If we substituted these values into the equation for portfolio variance,
this would be the model of portfolio variance in terms of the risk factors.
In other words, it's a risk factor model.
Notice that this is equivalent to the formula we saw earlier,
which is in matrix notation.
Let's see why. The covariance matrix
of the factors contains the variances and covariances of the factors.
Recall on the ice cream analogy that we can think of these
as the sugar and milk or the main ingredients of ice cream.
The matrix of factor exposures looks like this.
In our analogy, these like are the measuring spoons of
different sizes for each ingredient depending on the stock.
Also, here's the matrix of specific variances.
In the ice cream analogy,
these are the pecans and chocolate chips,
since these are ingredients that are specific to each flavor of ice cream,
but not common to both.
Finally, we have the vector of portfolio weights.
Since the portfolio weights define how much of each stock to put in the portfolio,
these are like the ice cream scoops,
which decide how much of each ice cream flavor to put in our bowl.
If we worked through the matrix multiplications and additions,
we'd end up with a single value,
which is the portfolio variance.
So I'm hoping that you now feel more familiar with
this formula for this factor model covariance.
Since there are lots of variables,
you can think of the ice cream analogy if it helps you keep track of everything.
Feel free to pause here to study this formula in more detail,
or if you like looking at ice cream.
If you want to walk through the math to solidify your learning,
I recommend calculating the matrix multiplications and also doing
the math using the non-matrix notation to see that you get the same result.
To do these calculations,
I recommend some tools that I found very helpful when studying math and machine learning.
Since we live in the age of smart phones and computers,
you may not have seen these tools in a while,
so I'll introduce them here.
This is a pencil and this is paper.
These are both very useful tools when studying math and machine learning,
so I encourage you to use them when you're studying. Cheers.